Lawrence of Arabia (1963) 5/5
February 9th, 2024

I went into this movie expecting a hagiography of T.E. Lawrence, and was very happy this expectation was not met. For those who are not aware, T.E. Lawrence was a Oxford-educated British man with a particular fascination for the Middle East and Arab culture who served a British officer during the First World War and played a role (of debatable significance) during the Arab Revolt and the Sinai/Palestine Campaign against the Ottoman Empire. He is known for serving as a liaison to Arab forces and supporting the Arab the Arab war of independence from the Ottoman empire, led by the Kingdom of Hejaz. His participation in these capaigns, alongside other British officers, ultimately resulted in the capture of Damascus from Ottoman armed forces, turning the tide against the Ottomans on the Middle Eastern front.

The goal of the Arab revolt was ostensibly to create a single unified and independent Arab state stretching from Aleppo to Aden, which the British promised to recognise in return for Arab military support against the Ottomans. Simultaneously, the British and French were in the midst of signing a secret treaty (the  Sykes–Picot Agreement) to maintain their spheres of influence over what was about to become the former Ottoman empire – a complete renegging of the promise to support a singular Arab state. *Lawrence of Arabia* (1963) is about these events. The triumph against the Ottomans and the betrayal of the Arabs is told through the Western vessel of T.E. Lawrence, based in large part on his 1926 book *Seven Pillars of Wisdom*.

Seeing as this film is often brought up as a classic example of the White Saviour archetype, I was expecting Lawrence to be depicted as a heroic and indispensible figure in the Arab revolt, along the lines of how he portrays himself in his book (which has been criticised for grossly overstaning his importance to the Middle Eastern campaign and embellsihing the heorisicm of his role). Instead, the film treats its titular subject as a morally ambiguous cautionary tale of saviourism and treating ordinary men as messiahs (a downfall which Frank Herbert draws upon as his inspiriation for Dune). He is egotistical. He is overconfident. He is foolish and naive. He calliously puts others at risk due to his own gross misundertandings of the situation. He is esentially out there playing D&D with people's lives, roleplyaing as a naturalised Arab and messiah figure for a conflict in which he ultimately has no stake. The horror that hits him when he realises this is palpable in the film as the consequences of his actions finally affect him personally, resulting in his capture and rape at the hands of the Ottoman General Hajim Bey in Dara’a. 

*Lawrence of Arabia* (1963) ends with the collapse of the short-lived Arab monarchy, led by Faisal I, in the recently captured Damascus – with Lawrence retreating back to a soft life without consequence in Britain while British soldiers rush past him to take the city under their own administration. You leave the movie feeling that nothing Lawrence did ultimately mattered. He doesn't actually have to live with the consequences of his actions – he is able to hang up his keffiyeh and go home as if the Arab Revolt was all some whimsical roleplaying adventure that he is now completing.

The depiction of Lawrence is so negative that Lawrence's younger brother, who had originally sold the director the rights to *Seven Pillars of Wisdom*, went on a campaign to denounce the film. Among his criticisms, he said, "I should not have recognised my own brother" who was "one of the nicest, kindest and most exhilarating people [he had] known."

Which depiction is accurate? I think it is likely impossible to say, as many of the things that T.E. Lawrence the historical figure did are recorded in his words only, through a heavy filter of his own inflated self-perceptions. Treating the movie as an accurate depiction of the man would be a mistake. Rather it is best understood a fictionised representation of a real person in the context of real events.

Where the movie greviously gets wrong in my opition – ignoring the usage of brown face that others have already discussed in depth – is its depiction of how influential Lawrence actually was on the Middle Eastern campaign, and in particular, how important he was to his Bedouin allies. From what I've read online, Lawrence is not regarded as a person of any particular note (in either a positive or negative sense) among  Arabs today. He is seen mainly as a mythologised hero to the West, where his status as a British man among the "natives" positions him as a vessel for understanding and sympathising with the Arab Revolt. I've read some comments suggesting that he *may* somewhere be still somewhat of a folk here among *some* Bedouin groups, but I honestly couldn't find any good sources to concretely back this up.

On a personal note, I love historic films and this perspective into the Middle Eastern campaign serves to add emotion and personalisation to the historical facts (though the films historical inaccuracies and Western-centric perspective should also be noted). Understanding the role of foriegn powers in the partition of the Ottoman empire is pivotal to appreciating the historic complexities driving current conflicts in the region. The movie tells this tale from its flawed and mythologised Western vessel, guiding its Western audiences in the 1960s and now to get caught up in stirrings of Arab nationalism, to feel the betrayal of Sikes-Picot, and to identify with a cause that without its Western perspective might seem quite foriegn and distant to them.